hey friends so now we're going to talk
about the most important category of
window functions for data analytics we
have the value functions or sometimes we
call them window analytical functions so
here we're going to cover four different
functions we have the lead lag first
value and last value and as usual we're
going to learn the concept behind them
how execute them behind the scenes and
then we're going to learn the syntaxes
and we're going to cover the most
important use cases for the value
functions that I collected from my
project so now let's start with the the
first question why do we call them value
functions so let's
go all right everyone so now we have
this very simple example we have the
months and the sales now we can use the
value functions in order to access a
value from another row so in order to
understand it let's say that SQL now
processing the months and we are
currently at the month of March so now
for example I would like to access the
value from the previous month from
February so in order to do that we can
use the lag function in order to get the
value of 10 so with that we have in the
same Row the current sales of the month
March and as well the sales from the
previous month the February and maybe in
other cases I would like to get the
sales of the next month from April in
order to do that we can use the function
lead and we will get at the same Row the
value five so now I can very quickly
compare the current month with the
previous month and as well with the next
month and now in the other cases you
might be interested in the first month
of your list so it's going to be here
January so in order to get the sales of
the first month you can use the function
first value so we're going to get at the
same row 20 and now for the last option
I think you already get it we can go and
get the value of sales of the last month
so here we can get the July so for that
we're going to use the function last
value and we will get the value of 40 so
this is exactly the purpose of the value
functions or analytical functions we can
access a value from another rows and
here it's very important to understand
as well the value functions is like
their ranking functions we have to use
the order by in order to sort the data
in order to understand what is the first
row and the last row in this example the
data is sorted by the month so guys the
access functions are really important
for analytics you can use it in order to
access a value from other rows in order
to do comparison all right so now let's
have a quick overview of the syntax and
the rues
for the value functions so here we have
four functions lead lag first value and
last value so as you can see we can
group them into two groups so we have
the lead and lag they are very similar
to each others especially with the
syntax we can use three things or three
arguments inside it expression offset
default for both of them for the first
value we can use only an expression so
that means we have to pass and value for
those functions you cannot leave it
empty so now about the expression data
type you can use any field with any data
type there is no restrictions about only
for example using numbers any data type
is allowed now about the definition of
the window the partition buy as usual is
optional like any other group the order
buy here is a must you must Define an
order buy it's like the ranking so here
you cannot leave it empty now we come to
the last one we have the frame clouds
they are really different stuff over
here so for the first two functions lead
and lag you are not allowed to Define
any frame so you are not allowed to
Define any subset of data it's very
similar to the ranking so you must use
order buy but you cannot Define the
frame of the window but for the other
two functions the first value and the
last value they are optional you can go
and use them and for the last value it
is recommended to Define frame CLA don't
worry about it we're going to have
enough examples in order to understand
so as you can see those functions has
different requirements so there is no
generic rule for all of them but one
thing that they all agree on that you
must use order buy so now as usual what
going to do we're going to go and deep
dive into those functions we're going to
address first the two functions lead and
lack because they are very similar to
each others we can understand the use
cases when to use them and of course
we're going to practice in SQL so let's
go lead lack functions the lead function
can allow you to access a value from the
next row within a window where the lack
function is exactly the opposite it
going to allow you to access a value
from a bra row within a window it sounds
very easy right so let's understand how
isql going to execute those functions
okay so now let's have a quick overview
of the Syntax for both of the functions
lead and log we have here very simple
example for the lead function so as
usual we start with the function name
it's going to be the lead and now after
that we're going to go and pass the
arguments and as you can see we have
here multiple stuff so let's do it step
by step so the first thing it does we're
going to go and specify an expression
and the data type could be any data type
it could be a number like here the sales
it could be character like names or
dates or anything so this is required we
have to specify an expression we cannot
leave it empty and we can use any data
type now moving on to the next one we
have here a number so what is this this
is the offset and this offset is
optional so you can go and skip it so
what offsets means what we are doing
over here we are specifying for SQL the
number of rows forward or backward from
the current row so here in this example
we are specifying the offset as two
using the lead and with that you are
telling a scale go jump to the next two
rows and get me the value and if you are
using lag it means you are telling SQL
go back two rows up and get me the value
so here you are telling SQL how many
rows it needs to jump and if you don't
specify anything like leave it empty SQL
going to go and use a one so the default
of this with the offsets is going to be
one if you don't specify anything all
right moving on to the last one and to
the third one this is as well optional
you can go and leave it empty so here it
is is the default value now what happens
with those functions that sometimes SQL
jump to the next two rows or something
like that and SQL doesn't find anything
so there is no more rows available to
access and with that SQL going to go and
return a null so that means if SQL goes
to the next rows or go to the previous
rows and doesn't find anything SQL as a
default going to go and return a null so
if you don't specify anything over here
in those scenarios you will have null
values as a return from the whole
function but in some scenarios you don't
want to have a null you would like to
have a value so here you are defining
the default value so it should not be a
null it should be a 10 so SQL if you
don't find anything return a 10 don't
return a null so again guys the default
values the offsets all those
informations are optional for you in
order to configure it but you should
know that default if you don't use
anything for the offset is going to be
one for the default value going to be
null but you must specify an expression
so here you cannot leave it empty all
right so that's all about the arguments
that you can pass to the lead or lag
functions then the next stuff are the
standard stuff so we have the overa then
we have the partition buy as usual
partition buy is optional and then to
the order buy those functions it's like
the rank functions it requires you to
sort the data so it is a must to sort
the data otherwise SC will not know what
is the next row what are the previous
rows so we have to sort the data it is
required you cannot skip this so it is
not optional all right so the syntax is
not crazy right we have the usual stuff
but only we can go and configure the
default value and the offsets okay guys
now we have very simple example we have
months and sales and we're going to go
and understand how the SQL works for
both of the functions lead and lag side
by side so now in the first example we
are interested in the sales of the next
month so in order to do that we're going
to use the lead function so lead and
then we're going to specify the argument
it is the sales we want the value of
sales and then we Define the window like
this this order by month so it's going
to be ascending and now in the right
side we're going to be interested in the
sales of the previous months so in order
to do that we're going to use the lag
function so it's going to be very
similar to the lead we have lag and then
the sales since we are interested in the
sales and we're going to sore the data
by the month so now let's see how SQL
going to do it step by step and side by
side so SQL going to start with the
first so now let's see how SQ going to
process those informations side by side
and row by row so it's going to start
with the first row over here here what
is the next month of January it is
February and we are interested in the
sales of this row so SQL going to take
the value from the next row and we're
going to have the value of 10 so now by
looking through the January we can see
the sales of the next month of February
in the same row so now let's check the
right side over here now we are
interested in the previous month so what
is the previous months of the first row
it will be nothing right so we cannot
point it with anything that's whyq going
to say this is null there is no previous
month for the current row and we're
going to have it as a null okay so now
Esq going to go to the next row we are
at February what is the next month it's
going to be March and it going to point
to it so we will get the 30 as the sales
of the next month of March and on the
right side what is the previous month of
February it's going to be January right
so it's going to get the value the sales
of the previous month and here we will
get get 20 so as you can see it's very
simple on the lead we are always
checking the Nyx values on the lag we
are always checking the previous value
so let's keep going we are currently at
March what is the next month it's going
to be April so it's going to go and
point to it like this and we will get
the sales of the next month April for
the march on the right side what is the
previous month it is February right so
it's going to go and point to February
so we will get the sales of 10 and now
interesting to the last row over here
you can see that we are at April what is
the next month of April there is nothing
because we are at the end of our table
right so since there's no month after
that we will get a null in the output
but for the lag we still have a previous
month for April so what is the previous
month it is March and we will get the
sales of the March so it's going to be
30 so that's it guys it's really simple
right it's just like they are doing the
opposite things so now now if you check
those values side by side you can see
that with the lead we will always get a
value for the first row but for the last
row it can be always empty because there
is no next value we are at the end of
the table but if you check the lag for
the first value we will always get a
null because there is no previous value
or previous record from the first row
and for the last record as you can see
we're always going to get a value
because we will have a previous value
okay let's move on in order to
understand how SQL this time works with
the offsets and the default value so now
we have the same data but we have
different task so now on the left side
we would like to get the sales of two
months ahead so it's not the next month
it's going to be two months and we would
like to tell SQL if you don't find any
value don't return null return for us is
zero so this is going to be our default
now if you check the syntax it's going
to be exact like before but we are
adding now an offset of two because we
are interested in two months ahead and
we are specifying here a default value
zero so if you don't find anything put
zero don't put null now on the right s
we have the exact opposite we are
interested in the sales of two months
ago so we are not interested in the
direct previous month we need the sales
of two months ago and here the same
thing if you don't find anything don't
return null give us a zero so as you can
see we have the same syntax but using
the function lag so now let's understand
how SQL can to execute this step by step
and side by side so isq going to start
with the first month January so now isq
going to ask what is the sales of two
months ahead head so we are at January
it will not be February it's going to be
the month of March so it's going to go
and point it like this and we will get
the value of 30 so 30 is the sales of
two months ahead and now on the right
side we are as well at January it's
going going to ask the question what is
the sales off two months ago so we don't
have any previous data right so we will
not get anything isq going to return
null but it's going to check do we have
a default value well yes so this time
SQL will not return null it's going to
return the default value and this time
it's going to be zero all right so now
let's go to the next value we are
currently at February what is the sales
of two months ahead so it will not be
March it's going to be April so it's
going to go and point it like this and
we will get the value of five so now on
the right side we are currently at
February now the question is what is the
sales of two months ago we have history
we have the previous month but we don't
have two months in the history that's
why we will still get Z at the output
with the default value okay so now let's
keep going to the next value we are
currently at March it's going to ask
what is the sales of the two months
ahead we have only one month after that
but we don't have two months that's why
SQL will not find anything and it's
going to return null but it's going to
go and use the default so here we're
going to go and get the value of zero
there is no more data available in the
table but now on the right side we are
currently at March and we are asking
what is the sales of two months ago so
now we have enough history in in the
past and it's going to get the value of
20 all right so now let's go to the last
month over here in our table April what
is the sales off two months ahead we
don't have any data so it's going to be
zero as well but now on the right side
we are currently at April what is sales
of two months ago we have enough history
that's why SQL going to get and point it
like this so we will get the February
going to be 10 so that's it this is how
SQL works with the lead and lag using
offsets and as well default value let's
go back in SQL in order to practice
those two
functions okay so now we have the
following task and it says analyze the
month over month performance by finding
the percentage change in sales between
the current and the previous month so
that means we have to go and compare the
current month with the previous month so
the main use case for the lead and L is
to do comparison analyzes and we have a
very common use case it's called time
serious analyzes so it is the method of
analyzing our business our data in order
to understand the patterns and Trends
over the time and one of the most
important and classical question that
you're going to get from the decision
makers or business is to do
year-over-year analysis or month over
month analysis so the year-over-year
analyzis going to help us in order to
understand the overall growth or decline
in the performance of our business over
the years over the time but in the other
hand we have month over month analysis
in in order to do shortterm Trends
analyzes and as well discover the
patterns in the seasonality so the main
focus is to understand the performance
of our business over the time so now
let's go back to SQL in order to solve
the task okay guys so now let's go and
do it step by step now what is the first
step before we go and compare things
together we have to collect the data we
have to do the calculations first so we
have to find out first the total sales
for the current month and then the total
sales for the previous month and after
that we can go and compare them so now
let's start with the easy stuff we have
to find out the current sales for the
current month so in order to do that
let's just do very simple select so what
do we need we need let's take the order
ID let's take the order dates because
inside it we have the month and let's go
and collect the sales so that's it for
now from sales orders so let's go and
execute this so now on the result we got
the usual stuff we have 10 orders sales
and order dates but the order date is on
the level of the days and we are not
interested on the whole date we would
like to get only the month in order to
calculate the total sales for the month
now we're going to go and use a function
in order to extract the month from a
date don't worry about it we're going to
have a dedicated chapter in order to
show you how to deal with the dates
formats in SQL so now what we're going
to do we will use a very simple function
called month and order dates and let's
call let's order month so that's it
let's go and execute it now as you can
see we got the new New Field where we
have only the month of formations so
here we have January February and March
so now the next step is that we want to
find the total sales for each month so
what we're going to do we're going to go
and use group buy so let's do that we're
going to go and say we want the sum of
sales I'm just going to call it current
month sales and let's go and get rid of
all those informations we're going to go
and group by the month right so Group by
let's have the month so that's it let's
go and execute it so it's very simple
right we got now the three months and
the total sales of the current month so
now with that we got the first
information that we need in order to do
the comparison we have for each row the
total sales for the current month so now
the next thing that we're going to do is
to find out the total sales for the
previous month like side by side in the
same row and in order to do that we have
learned we can go and use the lag
function so we're going to go and
integrate the lag window function in the
Group by so we going to do it like this
so lag we are now interested in the
previous month so that's why we're going
to go and get the sum of sales as an
expression inside it and after that we
can Define the window it can be like
this over and Order buy is a m so we're
going to go and sort the data by the
month right so let's go and do it and
with that we have defined the previous
month sales so you are the previous
month sales so now let's go and execute
it in order to to see the results all
right so now let's check the results the
first row what is the previous month
there is no previous months we are at
the first record and the first month
that's why we have null now let's go to
February what is the sales of the
previous month from January it is 105 so
this is correct and now to the last
value to the March what is the sales of
February the previous month it is 195 so
with that we got the two informations we
have the current month and as well the
previous month so guys as you can see
it's magic right it's very simple we can
go and use the lead and lag functions in
order to access another values from
another rows without doing any
complicated joints and so on okay so now
what is the next step we're going to go
and subtract the total sales from the
current month with the previous month so
in order to do that we're going to go
and use a subquery like this so select
star from and we're going to have it
like this as subquery and now the
calculation is very simple let me just
move this little bit down so it is the
current month subtracted from the
previous month and let's go and call it
month over month change so that's it
let's go and execute this so now let's
go and check the results for the first
month you can see that we don't have any
value and that is correct because the
previous month is empty so there is no
change now moving on to the February you
can see over here we got plus 990 that
means we have here Improvement in the
performance of our sales now moving on
to the last one it's really bad we have
decline in our performance we can see
that we have minus 115 so this means the
current month is doing really bad
compared to the previous month so the
March is really bad month okay so now as
you can see in the output we got the
absolute numbers but the task says find
the percentage change so we have to
convert this to a percentage and we can
do it like this it's very simple let's
do it in a new column just going to zoom
out a little bit so it's going to be the
change the differences divided by the
previous month sales and then let's go
and multiply it with 100 in to get the
percentage so like this and now as you
can see we got zeros and that's because
those numbers are integer so we have to
go and cast one of those values just
going to do it for the first so cast and
you are float so that's it let's go and
execute it again now the result looks
better we have the percentages but we
have a lot of decimals so let's go
around the number to let's say one
decimal so only one and let's give it a
name so you are month over month
percentage so let's execute so now as
you can see things get better and with
that we have calculated the percentage
change in sales between the current and
the previous months and this is how we
do month over month
analyzes all right so now we have
another use case for the lead and lck
function we can use them in order to do
customer retention analysis it's all
about measuring the customer behavior
and loyalty so we are helping the
business and decision makers to build
strong relationship with the loyal
customers and for them as well to focus
on their needs so now let's see how we
can use lead and lag function in order
to do customer retention analyses so
let's go all right so now we have the
following task and it says in order to
analyze Customer Loyalty rank customers
based on the average days between their
orders so there is a lot of things going
on over here let's do it step by step
and I would like always to start with a
very simple select so let's go select
informations like the order ID let's get
the customer ID and as well since we
want the days we would like to have the
date so order date from the table sales
orders and let's go and sort the data so
order by customer ID and order dates so
that's it let's go and execute so now as
usual we got our 10 orders the customers
and when they did order so now let's
check the task let's solve this over
here days between their orders so we
have to find how many days are between
two orders for example if we check the
customer number one over here he did
order around 10 January and the second
order is like after 10 days 20 January
so we have to go and subtract those two
dates now in order to subtract those
informations and do calculations we have
to have everything in the same row so
for example if we are at the first row
over here I would like to have as well
one column about the next order so the
date of the NY order so we have to
access a value from another row of
course we can go and do joins but we
have lead and lag functions and for this
scenario we're going to go and use the
lead window function so let's go and do
that I'm going to go and call the order
date over here as a current order and
let's go and calculate the lead so we I
would like to get the next order dates
so I would like to get this value over
here in the same row that's why we this
time we're going to get the order dates
and now let's go and Define the window
now we have to go and partition the data
because we are analyzing each customer
separately right so that's why we have
to partition that by the customer ID and
of course in order to do the lead we
have to use the order bu so let's go and
Define that as well order buy and it's
going to be by the order date so now we
have to give it a name the order date
here is the current order this going to
be the next order so next order let me
zoom out a little bit and make this
smaller so let's go and execute it so
now as you can see in the output we got
a new column called Next order and with
that we got the current order the
current row and as well the value from
the next row so what is the next row
it's going to be the 20 January the same
thing of course for the next row over
here we have the current order dates and
the next order dates so this value going
to be exactly as the next one over here
15 of February and then since we are
working with window this is this is the
whole window over here the last order
for this customer it's 15 of the
February there is no next order so this
going to be null the same thing if you
check the other customers you can see
always the last order don't have any
next order so looks like everything is
fine and for the last customer he has
only one order so now with this we got
all the informations for our
calculations so we have the current
order and the next order in the same row
now we can go and subtract them in order
to get the dates between those two
orders and now in order to subtract date
we have to use the function date div
don't worry about those functions we're
going to explain all those stuff in the
next chapters so now just follow me with
those steps what we're going to do we're
going to go and subtract this date the
order date with the whole thing over
here right so the whole thing here is
the next order so let's do it in a new
line and it's going to be very simple so
date diff we are finding the differences
between two dates so the syntax going to
be like this first we have to Define
what we are talking about are they days
months years and so on so we have to
tell SQL find me the differences in days
now we have to specify two days so the
first one going to be the order date
this is the current date and the second
date going to be the whole thing from
here so let's take it and put it Side by
by side and this calculation going to
give us number of days so we're going to
call this days until next order all
right so now let's go and execute the
whole thing so now let's check the
result as you can see over here we got
10 so this is 10 days between those two
dates and the next one we have around 26
days here we have a null because we
don't have here a date and for the next
one we have 31 days so we have a whole
month over here so everything is working
perfectly and with that we have solve
only this part days between their orders
so guys you see right this is the magic
of the lead and lag function we can very
easily access any information you need
in the same Row in order to do such an
important analyzis and with very simple
query we are not doing any crazy stuff
like joining and stuff we are just
specifying the lead function so now we
got all the informations that we need
next we're going to go and calculate the
average of those days so in order to do
that we have to go and use a subquery so
let me just zoom out so let's go and
select star just prepare the subquery so
the whole thing going to be a subquery
I'm going just get rid of the order by
it's not now necessary so let me just
put it like this and shift it so now
what do we need we need the average of
the days so we need the average of this
value so what going to do we're going to
go and use a group I so customer ID
since we have to find the average for
each customers and we're going to get
this value and say average days until
the next order and we're going to call
it average days so and we have here to
groupy so groupy customer ID so like
this just make this a little bit smaller
and zoom in here so that's it now we are
just doing a very simple average and
group ey statements so let's go and
execute it now as you can see it's going
going to go and aggregate the data so we
have now only four customers and for
each customer we have the average days
between their orders so now what is
missing in our task if you check over
here it says rank the customers based on
this average so we have to go and use
the rank function so here again another
window function that we have to go and
use we're going to do it together with
the group I so let me just make this a
little bit smaller and then let's do it
over here so I'm just going to go with
the rank function then we're going to
define the window like this over order
bu and then we're going to go and sort
the data by the average days so that
means we're going to go and get this
calculation over here and put it as
order buy it's going to be ascending so
we are focusing on the lowest average
days so that's it let's call it rank
average so now let's go ah and execute
this so now by checking the result you
can see now we have a ranking for the
average and here SC says that the number
one customer or the number one loyal
customer is the customer number four
which is not really correct because the
number four we don't have a lot of
informations about this customer he or
she did order only once so so either now
you go and like filter the data and
remove this customer where you say if
the average is null then don't put it in
the rank or we can go and replace this
value with a very huge value in order to
make it at the end of our list for
example we can go over here and replace
the null with
quisk like this and we say if the
average is null then let's say give me a
crazy number like this very huge one so
that's it let's go and execute and now
as you can see this customer going to be
at the end of our list and now we can
see that the most loyal customer is
number one and then the other two
customers are in the rank two here we
are sharing the same rank since we have
the same average so guys with that we
have sold the task and we have ranked
the customers based on the average days
between the orders so we have now a
really nice Rank and we can understand
now the behavior of the customers and
maybe we have to go and focus on the
customer number one and understand here
or share needs and of course the
function that helped us here in order to
do such a customer ition analyzes is the
lead function in order to find the next
order to calculate the days so this is
how you use lead functions to do such a
use
case the first value and the last value
functions I think the name says
everything right so the first value can
allow you to access a value from the
first row within a window where the last
value exactly the opposite it can to
allow you to access a value from the
last row within a window EAS right so
now let's understand how isql execute
those functions okay so now as usual we
have this very simple example we have
the Mones and sales and we have it twice
because we would like now to go and
compare side by side the two functions
first value and last value so now for
the left sides we would like to get the
sales of the first month and on the
right side we would like to get the
sales of the last month so now for the
first task we can go and use the first
value it's very simple so the first
value function then the argument going
to be sales since we want the sales and
then the window going to be defined like
this order by month because we want to
get the first month so as usual we must
use order by now on the right side in
order to get the sales of the last month
we can go and use the last value right
so the same things last value sales over
order by month so as you can see on the
left and right we don't use any frame
definition but the default going to be
used from this all right so now let's
see how SQL going to process both of
those queries side by side so the first
step is going to go and sort the data
they are already sorted from the lowest
to the highest and then the next step is
going to start row by row finding the
first value on the left side so what is
the unbounded proceeding it's going to
be static and always pointing to January
so this is always going to be the
unbounded proceeding we have it in both
sides like this and what is the current
row it's going to be at the start the
first row and on the right side the same
things over here so the window
definition going to be is only one row
right so what is is the first value in
this window it is 20 right the same
things on the right side what is the
last value in this window it is as well
20 so we will get exactly same results
now let's move to the second R so it's
going to be pointing to February and the
frame definition going to be here
extended like this so what is the first
value in this Frame it's going to be as
well 20 right so in the output we're
going to get 20 and now in the right
side the current row going to be as well
pointing to February
and the window going to go get extended
so now what is the last value of this
Frame it's going to be 10 now let's keep
going we're going to go to the March and
the window going to get extended what is
the first value it's always going to be
the same so 20 on the right side window
going to get extended what is the last
value it's going to be 30 so as you can
see the defa definition is always having
the static start always the same start
of the subset and as we are moving with
the current draw the frame going to get
extended so now moving to the last one
and with that we will get the whole data
set inside the frame and the first s is
going to be 20 on the right side the
same things going to get extended like
this and this time the last one going to
be April and five so now if you go and
compare them side by side you see that
on the left side the task is solved and
everything is working correctly right so
we have for each row always the sales of
the first row and what is the first row
it is is January so we have everywhere a
20 which is correct but now if you check
the right side you can see there is
something wrong right we are getting not
the last value we should always get appr
right we should have here everywhere a
five so we have here exactly the same
result as the sales so it's really
useless to use it like this right and
that's of course because SQL is using
the default definition of the window
frame last value is the only function
from all window functions that you
cannot use the default frame definition
you have to go and customize the frame
definition in order to get the effect of
the last value for the first value
everything is working if you're using a
default frame if you're not specifying
anything but for the last value you will
not get the effect correctly without
customizing the frame window so my
friends you can go and use the first
value function like all other window
functions without defining a frame you
can go with the default and you will get
the effect of the first value but the
last value you have to go and Define a
frame so let's see how we can solve that
all right so now in order to solve this
we going to define the frame like this
it's going to be the rows between the
current row and the unbounded following
so we just switch things around so now
let's see how this going to work now of
course SQL going to go and sort the data
and so on now SQL going to have a
pointer to the unbounded following so
it's going to point always to the last
row in our data set and then it's going
to proceed step by step so the first row
going to be like this and the frame
going to be the whole thing right so
from the current row until the unbounded
following so what is the last value the
last row it's going to be the five right
the April so we will get in the output
five now let's proceed to the next value
the frame going to be shorter and
smaller and what is the last value it's
going to be as well the five right so
now we jump to the next one and the
frame going to be like this what is the
last value as well five and then we will
get the last value like this current row
is equal to the unbounded following we
have only one row and it's going to be
as well five so as you can see it's very
simple just fix the frame clause and you
will get the last value working as
expected so this is how SQL going to go
and do it now let's go back toale and
start practicing all right so now we
have the following task it says find the
lowest and highest sales for each
product so now let's see how we can do
this as usual we're going to start with
very simple select statement so select
order ID we need the product ID and as
well their sales so let's select the
table sales orders
so that's it let's go and select this
now in the output we got our orders
product and sales so now let's start
with the first part of the task find the
lowest sales for each product so in
order to do that we can use the first
value function so let's go and do that
first value then what we are talking
about we have to give an expression we
need the lowest and highest sales so
let's go and have the sales inside it
and now we have to define the window so
over since we are saying for each
products that means we have to go and
make windows so we have to divide the
data using Partition by products ID and
then we must use an order buy right so
we have to go and sort the data by the
sales since the first value should be
the lowest value we have to do it as
ascending from the lowest sales to the
highest sales so we're just going to
leave it like this as a default and
we're going to call it lowest sales so
let's go and execute this so now let's
go and check our result first SQL going
to go and partition the data by the
product ID so as you can see we got now
here four windows then sort the data by
the sales so the data are sorted from
the lowest to the highest from 10 to 90
so now what is the first value of the
sales it is the first row right so it's
going to be 10 that's why we have
everywhere a 10 let's check another one
let's take this one here so this window
has two rows and it is sorted and the
lowest sales or let's say the first
value is 2 five so with that we have
solved the first part of the task
finding the lowest sales for each
product let's go to the next one we have
to find out the highest sales for each
product so let's go and use the last
value for this so let's have a new line
we're going to have last
value again the
sales then we're going to go and Define
the window so it's going to be the exact
same window we have to partition the
data by the product ID and order the
data by sales so let's go and just copy
the previous one and let's call it for
now highest sales so let's go and
execute it so now if you check the
results you will see our issue over here
again right we are not getting the
highest sales for this window the
highest sales is 90 but as you can see
we are getting the exact same sales and
we have explained that in the previous
example so in order to fix this we're
going to go and add for it the frame so
row between current row and the
unbounded following so
now let's go and execute this so now
let's check the result as you can see
over here we got the highest sales
correctly so for this window the highest
one is 90 and as well for this window
the 60 and so on so with that you have
solved both of the tasks the lowest and
the highest sales but now I would like
to show you my honest opinion about this
task I will not go and use the last
value to find the highest sales so let
me show you how I usually do it I'm
going to go and use the first value in
order to find the last value so now let
me show you what I mean let's go and add
a new row I will just take the whole
thing from the lowest sales but what I'm
going to do I'm just going to go and
change the order so that means we will
not go and sort the data like this
ascending from the lowest sales to the
highest sales we're going to go and
switch it so we're going to go and sort
the data from the highest sales to the
lowest sales and with that the first
value going to be the highest sales so
let me just rename it
highest sales let's give it like two so
let's go and execute this and now you
can see over here we got the exact same
results because we sorted the data
differently and we get the first value
so this going to give you the exact same
effect like the last value and as you
can see I don't have to Define now any
window or something like that I can
stick with the default frame but just
twisting the order by so this is how you
can do it as well using only the first
value so now just for the sake of this
task there's as well another possibility
in how to solve this you can go and use
the minmax functions so let me just take
the same and have a new one the lowest
sales we can go and say you know what
let's get the minan so we are saying
find me the minimum sales and we don't
have to go and sort anything so we can
go and just divide it like this so let's
give it another ID let's go and execute
it so as you can see we got the exact
same results like the other two highest
sales so as you can see we can solve
this task using three different
functions either go and use the last
value but you have to define the frame
or you can go and use the first value
where you switch or flip the order by or
simply just using the max function in
order to get the highest sales so guys
as you can see we can use the first
value and the last value in order to
find out the extremes like here in this
example the lowest and the highest sales
so there is like similarity between
those two functions and as well the
minan and Max Max and of course what
we're going to do with this value over
here we can go and compare it with the
current sales so for example we can go
and extend our task where we say find
the difference in sales between the
current and the lowest sales so in order
to do that let me just clean up all
those stuff and let's stick with the
first value and the highest value like
this so we have to compare now the
current sales which is this field over
here the sales the original one with the
lowest sales with the whole thing from
here so let's go and do that so we're
going to have a new line and we're going
to say just simply subtract the sales
from the lowest sales so like this and
let's give it a name sales difference so
that's it let's go and execute it now as
you can see the result in one row I'm
comparing the current sales which is 90
with the lowest sales from this product
it's going to be the 10 so with that
we're going to get that distance let's
say between those two informations and
it going to be 80 so now for the next
one the distance between this value and
the lowest value is shorter so we are
near the lowest value so as you can see
over here we can now compare the sales
between the current sales and one
extreme in order to find the distances
between two values so this is again very
important analyzes in order to do
comparison
analyzes all right friends so now let's
do a quick recap about the value
functions or we call them sometimes
analytical functions so what what they
do they're going to go and allow you to
access a specific value from another row
this going to help you in order to do
complex calculations with very symol SQL
without having you joining tables
together or doing self joins and for the
value functions we have four types or
let's say four functions the first one
allows you to access the previous value
like the previous month using the lag
function the next one it allows you to
access the next values the next month
using the lead function then we have
another one it allows you to access the
first value in a subset using the first
value function and another option we can
go and access the last value in a subset
using the last value function moving on
to the next one we have the rules of the
syntax so about the first point it is
the Expressions we can go and use any
data type it could be a number string a
date anything now in order to perform
those functions we have to go and sort
the data by the order buy so order buy
is required it is a must then for the
frame you areow to use it so it is an
optional thing I would say always leave
it empty for the frame but only for the
last value you have to go and customize
otherwise it will not work now to the
next point we have the use cases we have
simply very important use cases for the
value functions in data analytics so
what we can do we can do time series
analyzes as we learned we can do month
over month analyzes and year over-year
analyzes those analyzes are classical
and it's always the first question in
that analyzes in order to measure are we
growing with the business is or are we
declining how the performance between
the current year and the previous year
so as you can see we are doing always
comparison using those window functions
the next use case is as well about the
time we can do time Gap analyses as we
analyzed the customer Behavior the
customer retention where we have
calculated the average days between two
orders and the last use case it's as
well about comparison comparison
analyzes we can go and use the value
functions in order to compare the
current value with extreme like
comparing the current sales with the
highest sales or to the lowest sales so
my friends those analyzes are essential
in data analyzes you will be countering
them in each company in each business
you have to answer those questions and
you can do that very easily using the
SQL window functions hey friends so
finally we have covered everything about
the SQL window functions and their
amazing use cases for data analyzis I
promise you you're going to use those
functions in real projects and now
moving on to the next chapter we're
going to focus Fus on the SQL set
operators they are very powerful in
order to compare and combine your data
sets if you like this video and you want
me to create more content like this I'm
going to really appreciate it if you
support the channel by subscribing
liking sharing commenting all those
stuff going to help the Channel with the
YouTube algorithm and as well my content
going to reach to the others so thank
you so much for watching and I will see
you in the next tutorial bye
he